Graph Support (#528)
pydantic/pydantic-ai: docs/graph.md

Reviewer: this file is impressive

    * Lastly, (and at the risk of torturing this metaphor), if you're a fan of medieval tools like mallets and untyped Python, you probably won't like nail guns or our approach to graphs. (But then again, if you're not a fan of type hints in Python, you've probably already bounced off PydanticAI to use one of the toy agent frameworks — good luck, and feel free to borrow my sledgehammer when you realize you need it)

    In short, graphs are a powerful tool, but they're not the right tool for every job. Please consider other [multi-agent approaches](multi-agent-applications.md) before proceeding.

    Unless you're sure you need a graph, you probably don't.

Graphs and finite state machines (FSMs) are a powerful abstraction to model, control and visualize complex workflows.

Alongside PydanticAI, we've developed `pydantic-graph` — an async graph and state machine library for Python where nodes and edges are defined using type hints.

While this library is developed as part of the PydanticAI; it has no dependency on `pydantic-ai` and can be considered as a pure graph library. You may find it useful whether or not you're using PydanticAI or even building with GenAI.

> `pydantic-graph` is designed for advanced users and makes heavy use of Python generics and types hints. It is not designed to b as beginner-friendly as PydanticAI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`pydantic-graph` is designed for advanced users and makes heavy use of Python generics and types hints. It is not designed to be as beginner-friendly as PydanticAI.
```

Author: thanks, fixed.

# Graphs

!!! danger "Don't use a nail gun unless you need a nail gun"
    If PydanticAI [agents](agents.md) are a hammer, and [multi-agent workflows](multi-agent-applications.md) are a sledgehammer, then graphs are a nail gun, with flames down the side:

    * sure, nail guns look cooler than hammers
    * but nail guns take a lot more setup than hammers
    * and nail guns don't make you a better builder, they make you a builder with a nail gun

>     * Lastly, (and at the risk of torturing this metaphor), if you're a fan of medieval tools like mallets and untyped Python, you probably won't like nail guns or our approach to graphs. (But then again, if you're not a fan of type hints in Python, you've probably already bounced off PydanticAI to use one of the toy agent frameworks — good luck, and feel free to borrow my sledgehammer when you realize you need it)

Reviewer: 1, I'm not sure if the metaphors here are sound (do nail guns really take a lot of setup? lol), and 2, I feel like this warning bubble is perhaps a bit overly strongly stated.

I feel like the current phrasing comes across a bit like you are comparing people who are afraid of the graph-based approach to people that who are afraid of types. And I don't think that's the intent, so I think it makes sense to try to just focus on "if you don't think you need this, you probably don't".

Author: we can tone it down a bit, but right now I think this is an okay start.

    In short, graphs are a powerful tool, but they're not the right tool for every job. Please consider other [multi-agent approaches](multi-agent-applications.md) before proceeding.

>     Unless you're sure you need a graph, you probably don't.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you're not confident a graph-based approach is a good idea, it's probably not necessary.
```
Just trying to soften the language a bit, the current phrasing somehow sounds just lightly condescending to me, if not toward the reader, then toward the library.

Graphs and finite state machines (FSMs) are a powerful abstraction to model, control and visualize complex workflows.

Alongside PydanticAI, we've developed `pydantic-graph` — an async graph and state machine library for Python where nodes and edges are defined using type hints.

> While this library is developed as part of the PydanticAI; it has no dependency on `pydantic-ai` and can be considered as a pure graph library. You may find it useful whether or not you're using PydanticAI or even building with GenAI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this library has been developed as part of PydanticAI; it has no dependency on `pydantic-ai` and can be considered as a pure graph-based state machine library. You may find it useful whether or not you're using PydanticAI or even building with GenAI.
```

> `pydantic-graph` is designed for advanced users and makes heavy use of Python generics and types hints. It is not designed to be as beginner-friendly as PydanticAI.

Reviewer: > as beginner-friendly as PydanticAI

I hope the usage of generics in PydanticAI can be considered beginner friendly 😅

!!! note "Very Early beta"
    Graph support was [introduced](https://github.com/pydantic/pydantic-ai/pull/528) in v0.0.19 and is in very earlier beta. The API is subject to change. The documentation is incomplete. The implementation is incomplete.

## Installation

`pydantic-graph` is a required dependency of `pydantic-ai`, and an optional dependency of `pydantic-ai-slim`, see [installation instructions](install.md#slim-install) for more information. You can also install it directly:

```bash
pip/uv-add pydantic-graph
```

## Graph Types

> Graphs are made up of a few key components:

Reviewer: I feel like I want to qualify the "Graph" here in some way. The lightest version of that would be putting it in backticks (i.e., "`Graph`s"), but saying something like "Execution Graphs" or "State-machine Graphs" or similar might help here. Just to clarify that this isn't like, a general purpose graph library — it's a state machine library for managing code execution that can be modeled as a graph.

### GraphContext

> [`GraphContext`][pydantic_graph.nodes.GraphContext] — The context for the graph run, similar to PydanticAI's [`RunContext`][pydantic_ai.tools.RunContext], this holds the state of the graph and is passed to nodes when they're run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`GraphContext`][pydantic_graph.nodes.GraphContext] — The context for the graph run, similar to PydanticAI's [`RunContext`][pydantic_ai.tools.RunContext]. This holds the state of the graph and is passed to nodes when they're run.
```

`GraphContext` is generic in the state type of the graph it's used in, [`StateT`][pydantic_graph.state.StateT].

### End

> [`End`][pydantic_graph.nodes.End] — return value to indicates the graph run should end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`End`][pydantic_graph.nodes.End] — return value to indicate the graph run should end.
```

`End` is generic in the graph return type of the graph it's used in, [`RunEndT`][pydantic_graph.nodes.RunEndT].

### Nodes

> Subclasses of [`BaseNode`][pydantic_graph.nodes.BaseNode] to define nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subclasses of [`BaseNode`][pydantic_graph.nodes.BaseNode] define nodes for execution in the graph.
```

> Nodes which are generally [`dataclass`es][dataclasses.dataclass] include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nodes, which are generally [`dataclass`es][dataclasses.dataclass], include:
```

> * any parameters required when calling the node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* fields containing any parameters required when calling the node
```

* the business logic to execute the node

> * return annotations which are read by `pydantic-graph` to determine the outgoing edges of the node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* return annotations, which are read by `pydantic-graph` to determine the outgoing edges of the node
```
(might make sense to say which method's return annotations will be used for this; it strikes me as weird to read "return annotations" on its own in the description of a class.)

Nodes are generic in:

> * **state** which must have the same type as the state of graphs they're included in, [`StateT`][pydantic_graph.state.StateT] has a default of `None`, so if you're not using state you can omit this generic parameter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **state**, which must have the same type as the state of graphs they're included in, [`StateT`][pydantic_graph.state.StateT]. This TypeVar has a default of `None`, so if you're not using state you can omit this generic parameter
```

> * **graph return type** this only applies if the node returns [`End`][pydantic_graph.nodes.End], [`RunEndT`][pydantic_graph.nodes.RunEndT] has a default of [Never][typing.Never] so this generic parameter can be omitted if the node doesn't return `End`, but must be included if it does.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **graph return type** — this only applies if the node returns [`End`][pydantic_graph.nodes.End]. [`RunEndT`][pydantic_graph.nodes.RunEndT] has a default of [Never][typing.Never] so this generic parameter can be omitted if the node doesn't return `End`, but must be included if it does.
```

2. `MyNode` is a dataclass and has a single field `foo`, an `int`.
3. The `run` method takes a `GraphContext` parameter, again parameterized with state `MyState`.
4. The return type of the `run` method is `AnotherNode` (not shown), this is used to determine the outgoing edges of the node.

We could extend `MyNode` to optionally end the run if `foo` is divisible by 5:

```py {title="intermediate_or_end_node.py" hl_lines="7 13 15" noqa="F821" test="skip"}
from dataclasses import dataclass

from pydantic_graph import BaseNode, End, GraphContext

@dataclass
class MyNode(BaseNode[MyState, int]):  # (1)!
    foo: int

    async def run(
        self,
        ctx: GraphContext[MyState],
    ) -> AnotherNode | End[int]:  # (2)!
        if self.foo % 5 == 0:
            return End(self.foo)
        else:
            return AnotherNode()
```

1. We parameterize the node with the return type (`int` in this case) as well as state.
2. The return type of the `run` method is now a union of `AnotherNode` and `End[int]`, this allows the node to end the run if `foo` is divisible by 5.

### Graph

> [`Graph`][pydantic_graph.graph.Graph] — The graph itself, made up of a set of nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`Graph`][pydantic_graph.graph.Graph] — this is the execution graph itself, made up of a set of node classes (i.e., `BaseNode` subclasses).
```

print([item.data_snapshot() for item in history])
#> [DivisibleBy5(foo=4), Increment(foo=4), DivisibleBy5(foo=5), End(data=5)]
```

1. The `DivisibleBy5` node is parameterized with `None` as this graph doesn't use state, and `int` as it can end the run.
2. The `Increment` node doesn't return `End`, so the `RunEndT` generic parameter is omitted, state can also be omitted as the graph doesn't use state.
3. The graph is created with a sequence of nodes.
4. The graph is run synchronously with [`run_sync`][pydantic_graph.graph.Graph.run_sync] the initial state `None` and the start node `DivisibleBy5(4)` are passed as arguments.

_(This example is complete, it can be run "as is" with Python 3.10+)_

A [mermaid diagram](#mermaid-diagrams) for this graph can be generated with the following code:

```py {title="graph_example_diagram.py" py="3.10"}
from graph_example import DivisibleBy5, fives_graph

fives_graph.mermaid_code(start_node=DivisibleBy5)
```

```mermaid
---
title: fives_graph
---
stateDiagram-v2
  [*] --> DivisibleBy5
  DivisibleBy5 --> Increment
  DivisibleBy5 --> [*]
  Increment --> DivisibleBy5
```

## Stateful Graphs

TODO introduce state

> TODO link to issue about persistent state.

Reviewer: Not sure if you wanted to update this before merging, but here's a reminder in case you forgot. I'm okay either way.

        else:
            print(f'No such product: {self.product}, try again')
            return SelectProduct()  # (12)!

vending_machine_graph = Graph(  # (13)!
    nodes=[InsertCoin, CoinsInserted, SelectProduct, Purchase]
)

async def main():
    state = MachineState()  # (14)!
    await vending_machine_graph.run(state, InsertCoin())  # (15)!
    print(f'purchase successful item={state.product} change={state.user_balance:0.2f}')
    #> purchase successful item=crisps change=0.25
```

1. The state of the vending machine is defined as a dataclass with the user's balance and the product they've selected, if any.
2. A dictionary of products mapped to prices.
3. The `InsertCoin` node, [`BaseNode`][pydantic_graph.nodes.BaseNode] is parameterized with `MachineState` as that's the state used in this graph.
4. The `InsertCoin` node prompts the user to insert coins. We keep things simple by just entering a monetary amount as a float. Before you start thinking this is a toy too since it's using [rich's `Prompt.ask`][rich.prompt.PromptBase.ask] within nodes, see [below](#custom-control-flow) for how control flow can be managed when nodes require external input.

> 5. The `CoinsInserted` node, again this is a [`dataclass`][dataclasses.dataclass], in this case with one field `amount`, thus nodes calling `CoinsInserted` must provide an amount.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. The `CoinsInserted` node; again this is a [`dataclass`][dataclasses.dataclass], in this case with one field `amount`, thus nodes calling `CoinsInserted` must provide an amount.
```

6. Update the user's balance with the amount inserted.
7. If the user has already selected a product, go to `Purchase`, otherwise go to `SelectProduct`.
8. In the `Purchase` node, look up the price of the product if the user entered a valid product.
9. If the user did enter a valid product, set the product in the state so we don't revisit `SelectProduct`.
10. If the balance is enough to purchase the product, adjust the balance to reflect the purchase and return [`End`][pydantic_graph.nodes.End] to end the graph. We're not using the run return type, so we call `End` with `None`.
11. If the balance is insufficient, to go `InsertCoin` to prompt the user to insert more coins.
12. If the product is invalid, go to `SelectProduct` to prompt the user to select a product again.
13. The graph is created by passing a list of nodes to [`Graph`][pydantic_graph.graph.Graph]. Order of nodes is not important, but will alter how [diagrams](#mermaid-diagrams) are displayed.

> 14. Initialize the state, this will be passed to the graph run and mutated as the graph runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
14. Initialize the state. This will be passed to the graph run and mutated as the graph runs.
```

> 15. Run the graph with the initial state, since the graph can be run from any node, we must pass the start node, in this case `InsertCoin`. [`Graph.run`][pydantic_graph.graph.Graph.run] returns a tuple of the return value (`None`) in this case, and the [history][pydantic_graph.state.HistoryStep] of the graph run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
15. Run the graph with the initial state. Since the graph can be run from any node, we must pass the start node — in this case, `InsertCoin`. [`Graph.run`][pydantic_graph.graph.Graph.run] returns a tuple of the return value (`None`) in this case, and the [history][pydantic_graph.state.HistoryStep] of the graph run.
```

> 16. The return type of the node's [`run`][pydantic_graph.nodes.BaseNode.run] method is important, it's used to determine the outgoing edges of the node, this in turn is used to render [mermaid diagrams](#mermaid-diagrams) and is enforced at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
16. The return type of the node's [`run`][pydantic_graph.nodes.BaseNode.run] method is important, as it is used to determine the outgoing edges of the node. This information is in turn is used to render [mermaid diagrams](#mermaid-diagrams) and is enforced at runtime to detect misbehavior as soon as possible.
```

> 17. The return type of `CoinsInserted`s [`run`][pydantic_graph.nodes.BaseNode.run] method is a union, meaning multiple outgoing edges are possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
17. The return type of `CoinsInserted`'s [`run`][pydantic_graph.nodes.BaseNode.run] method is a union, meaning multiple outgoing edges are possible.
```

> 18. Unlike other nodes `Purchase` can end the run, so the [`RunEndT`][pydantic_graph.nodes.RunEndT] generic parameter must be set, in this case it's `None` since the graph run return type is `None`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
18. Unlike other nodes, `Purchase` can end the run, so the [`RunEndT`][pydantic_graph.nodes.RunEndT] generic parameter must be set. In this case it's `None` since the graph run return type is `None`.
```

        'Review the email and provide feedback, email must reference the users specific interests.'
    ),
)

@dataclass
class Feedback(BaseNode[State, Email]):
    email: Email

    async def run(
        self,
        ctx: GraphContext[State],
    ) -> WriteEmail | End[Email]:
        prompt = format_as_xml({'user': ctx.state.user, 'email': self.email})
        result = await feedback_agent.run(prompt)
        if isinstance(result.data, EmailRequiresWrite):
            return WriteEmail(email_feedback=result.data.feedback)
        else:
            return End(self.email)

async def main():
    user = User(
        name='John Doe',
        email='john.joe@exmaple.com',
        interests=['Haskel', 'Lisp', 'Fortran'],
    )
    state = State(user)
    feedback_graph = Graph(nodes=(WriteEmail, Feedback))
    email, _ = await feedback_graph.run(state, WriteEmail())
    print(email)
    """
    Email(
        subject='Welcome to our tech blog!',
        body='Hello John, Welcome to our tech blog! ...',
    )
    """
```

_(This example is complete, it can be run "as is" with Python 3.10+ — you'll need to add `asyncio.run(main())` to run `main`)_

## Custom Control Flow

> In many real-world applications, Graphs cannot run uninterrupted from start to finish — they require external input or run over an extended period of time where a single process cannot execute the entire graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In many real-world applications, Graphs cannot run uninterrupted from start to finish — they might require external input, or run over an extended period of time such that a single process cannot execute the entire graph run from start to finish without interruption.
```

async def main():
    state = QuestionState()  # (1)!
    node = Ask()  # (2)!
    history: list[HistoryStep[QuestionState]] = []  # (3)!
    while True:
        node = await question_graph.next(state, node, history)  # (4)!
        if isinstance(node, Answer):
            node.answer = Prompt.ask(node.question)  # (5)!
        elif isinstance(node, End):  # (6)!
            print(f'Correct answer! {node.data}')
            #> Correct answer! Well done, 1 + 1 = 2
            print([e.data_snapshot() for e in history])
            """
            [
                Ask(),
                Answer(question='What is the capital of France?', answer='Vichy'),
                Evaluate(answer='Vichy'),
                Reprimand(comment='Vichy is no longer the capital of France.'),
                Ask(),
                Answer(question='what is 1 + 1?', answer='2'),
                Evaluate(answer='2'),
            ]
            """
            return
        # otherwise just continue
```

1. Create the state object which will be mutated by [`next`][pydantic_graph.graph.Graph.next].
2. The start node is `Ask` but will be updated by [`next`][pydantic_graph.graph.Graph.next] as the graph runs.

> 3. The history of the graph run is stored in a list of [`HistoryStep`][pydantic_graph.state.HistoryStep] objects, again [`next`][pydantic_graph.graph.Graph.next] will update this list in place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The history of the graph run is stored in a list of [`HistoryStep`][pydantic_graph.state.HistoryStep] objects. Again, [`next`][pydantic_graph.graph.Graph.next] will update this list in place.
```

5. If the current node is an `Answer` node, prompt the user for an answer.
6. Since we're using [`next`][pydantic_graph.graph.Graph.next] we have to manually check for an [`End`][pydantic_graph.nodes.End] and exit the loop if we get one.

_(This example is complete, it can be run "as is" with Python 3.10+ — you'll need to add `asyncio.run(main())` to run `main`)_

A [mermaid diagram](#mermaid-diagrams) for this graph can be generated with the following code:

```py {title="ai_q_and_a_diagram.py" py="3.10"}
from ai_q_and_a_graph import Ask, question_graph

question_graph.mermaid_code(start_node=Ask)
```

```mermaid
---
title: question_graph
---
stateDiagram-v2
  [*] --> Ask
  Ask --> Answer
  Answer --> Evaluate
  Evaluate --> Reprimand
  Evaluate --> [*]
  Reprimand --> Ask
```

You maybe have noticed that although this examples transfers control flow out of the graph run, we're still using [rich's `Prompt.ask`][rich.prompt.PromptBase.ask] to get user input, with the process hanging while we wait for the user to enter a response. For an example of genuine out-of-process control flow, see the [question graph example](examples/question-graph.md).

## Mermaid Diagrams

> Pydantic Graph, can generate [mermaid](https://mermaid.js.org/) [`stateDiagram-v2`](https://mermaid.js.org/syntax/stateDiagram.html) diagrams for graphs, as shown above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pydantic Graph can generate [mermaid](https://mermaid.js.org/) [`stateDiagram-v2`](https://mermaid.js.org/syntax/stateDiagram.html) diagrams for graphs, as shown above.
```

These diagrams can be generated with:

* [`Graph.mermaid_code`][pydantic_graph.graph.Graph.mermaid_code] to generate the mermaid code for a graph
* [`Graph.mermaid_image`][pydantic_graph.graph.Graph.mermaid_image] to generate an image of the graph using [mermaid.ink](https://mermaid.ink/)
* [`Graph.mermaid_save`][pydantic_graph.graph.Graph.mermaid_save] to generate an image of the graph using [mermaid.ink](https://mermaid.ink/) and save it to a file

> Beyond the diagrams shown above, you can also customise mermaid diagrams with the following options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Beyond the diagrams shown above, you can also customize mermaid diagrams with the following options:
```
